GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: gunfire
after a traffic stop. One
militant is dead
and eight others arrested, while
the FBI surrounds
an Oregon wildlife reserve where
activists
continue a three-week standoff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday:
on-the-ground takes from Iowa
and New Hampshire,
just days now from the first
voting.
GWEN IFILL: And a new memorial
to honor those
who served in World War I.
EDWIN FOUNTAIN, U.S. World War I
Centennial
Commission: You can't understand
the country
that we live in today, you can't
understand
that the world that we live in
today, without
understanding World War I, and
this is our
opportunity to try to do
something with that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: It began on
January 2, when
an armed anti-government group
took over a
national wildlife refuge in
Eastern Oregon.
Then, late yesterday, the
standoff suddenly
lurched into violent conflict.
And, today, questions swirled
about what happened
and what happens next.
After weeks of waiting, federal
and state
officers corralled the militia
leaders during
a traffic stop.
MAN: Looked like they were
making some arrests
and clogging up the highway. I
am glad to
see an end to this. Hopefully,
it is an end
to this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: They were
captured as they
drove to a community meeting in
John Day,
Oregon, 70 miles north of Burns,
near the
wildlife refuge. Gunfire erupted
during the
confrontation, and the group's
unofficial
spokesman, LaVoy Finicum, was
shot and killed.
The Arizona rancher had said
he'd rather die
than be arrested.
Jason Patrick is one of those
still occupying
the refuge.
JASON PATRICK, Militia Member:
They told us
that we could safely leave.
Well, the group
that was leaving has a dead man
in it. There's
another man who left and was in
Arizona, and
he's in custody. They have said
peaceful resolution
the whole time, so it depends on
what you
believe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: FBI officials
refused today
to give details of how the
shooting happened,
while insisting the whole
situation could
have been avoided.
GREGORY BRETZING, FBI Special
Agent in Charge:
The armed occupiers have been
given ample
opportunity to leave the refuge
peacefully.
They have been given
opportunities to negotiate.
Instead, these individuals have
chosen to
threaten and intimidate the
America they profess
to love and, through criminal
actions, bring
these consequences upon
themselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amanda Peacher is
with Oregon
Public Broadcasting, and has
been covering
the standoff.
AMANDA PEACHER, Oregon Public
Broadcasting:
It is very tense and a very
anxious place
here in Burns, Oregon, today. I
think a lot
of people in this community have
been suffering
for weeks now, wondering how
this is going
to end. And while some people in
this community
sympathize with the militants'
message that
federal lands would be in better
hands under
local control. No one here
wanted violence.
So, I'm seeing a lot of grief
and a lot of
anxiety and uncertainty as to
what could happen
next with the remaining
occupiers still at
the refuge and with the hefty
law enforcement
presence here in Burns.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Authorities
arrested the group's
leader, Ammon Bundy, at the
traffic stop along
with his brother, Ryan, and
three others,
Brian Cavalier, Shawna Cox, and
Ryan Payne.
Two other occupiers, Joseph
Donald O'Shaughnessy
and Peter Santilli, were taken
into custody
separately back in Burns. Hours
later, an
eighth militia, Jon Eric
Ritzheimer, surrendered
to police in Arizona. Each will
face felony
charges of conspiring to impede
federal officers.
The group has occupied the
Malheur National
Wildlife Refuge since January 2
to protest
federal control of public lands.
RYAN BUNDY, Militia Member: We
want to make
sure that they remain open to
the public,
where people can hunt and fish
and hike and
camp and watch the birds. We
also want to
make sure that those who own the
rights on
these lands can use it without
inhibition
from government.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the local
sheriff, Dave
Ward, warned today that it's
time for the
standoff to end.
DAVE WARD, Harney County
Sheriff: It's time
for everybody in this illegal
occupation to
move on. There doesn't have to
be bloodshed
in our community.
If we have issues with the way
things are
going in our government, we have
a responsibility
as citizens to act on those in
an appropriate
manner. We don't arm up.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, Amanda
Peacher.
AMANDA PEACHER: Those remaining
have decided
to stay, no matter what it
takes. Many have
told reporters that they are
willing to die
there. And they seem to be
making preparations
to sort of hunker down.
We have heard reports that
they're building
trenches, and that they are
armed, although
we don't know to what extent.
And they seem
ready to stay and potentially
fight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Checkpoints have
now been set
up along key routes in and out
of the refuge
to secure the area. One of the
occupation
leaders says five or six militia
members are
still holding out there.
GWEN IFILL: In the day's other
news, the Federal
Reserve kept a key short-term
interest rate
unchanged. Fed policy-makers had
raised rates
in December for the first time
in nearly a
decade, but, today, they said
they need to
assess slumping markets and
plunging oil prices.
That could mean additional rate
hikes will
be coming -- will be slower in
coming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street had
wanted an even
stronger signal that the Fed
will delay further
rate increases, and stocks fell
as a result.
The Dow Jones industrial average
lost 222
points to drop below 15950. The
Nasdaq fell
nearly 100 points. And the S&P
500 slid 20.
GWEN IFILL: The focus of the
Democratic presidential
contest shifted, at least for a
while today,
to the White House. Vermont
Senator Bernie
Sanders met privately with
President Obama
on foreign policy, the economy
and politics.
Afterwards, Sanders brushed
aside talk that
the president's recent praise of
Hillary Clinton
shows he favors her.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I know there was some discussion
the other
day about a Politico interview
where he was
tipping the scale towards
Secretary Clinton.
I don't believe that at all.
I think he and the vice
president have tried
to be fair and even-handed in
the process,
and I expect they will continue
to be that
way.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, Clinton
called for
adding another Democratic debate
before the
New Hampshire primary on
February 9. But the
Democratic National Committee
said it's sticking
to its sanctioned schedule.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Germany, the
ruling Cabinet
has approved new deportation
measures for
foreigners who commit crimes.
Now the German
Parliament has to sign off. The
government
is undergoing pressure to act
since a wave
of New Year's Eve violence in
Cologne and
other cities. Much of it was
blamed on migrants.
GWEN IFILL: The United Nations
launched an
appeal today for nearly $400
million in humanitarian
aid to Afghanistan. U.N. relief
officials
said it's vitally needed to help
a surge of
refugees. More than 300,000
Afghans fled their
homes last year, as fighting
rose sharply.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
and China
dug in today over how to punish
North Korea
for its latest nuclear test. In
Beijing, Secretary
of State John Kerry and his
Chinese counterpart
agreed on the need for a U.N.
resolution,
but not on a U.S. call for
significant new
sanctions.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: It's
good to agree on the goal, but
it's not enough
to agree on the goal. We believe
we need to
agree on the meaningful steps
necessary to
get to the achievement of the
goal, to the
negotiations that result in
denuclearization.
WANG YI, Chinese Foreign
Minister (through
translator): In order to
maintain peace and
stability on the Korean
Peninsula, we have
to first achieve
denuclearization there. And
only through negotiations will
we eventually
achieve denuclearization on the
peninsula.
Sanctions are not the goal. The
key is to
resolve problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: China is North
Korea's lone
major ally, but the U.S. has
complained that
Beijing is not using all the
leverage it has
to influence the country.
GWEN IFILL: Back in this
country, the governor
of Michigan is defending his
response to the
lead contamination crisis in
Flint. Republican
Rick Snyder visited the city and
announced
an advisory group to recommend
long-term fixes
for the water system.
But at a news conference, Snyder
deflected
criticism that he isn't doing
enough to reach
out to the people of Flint.
GOV. RICK SNYDER (R), Michigan:
I'm looking
to do tele-town halls where I
can get on the
phone with people and have them
ask their
questions, the citizens of
Flint, because
I do care about the citizens.
QUESTION: So, will that be
happening in the
short-term, hear directly from
the people?
GOV. RICK SNYDER: Yes. Yes. And
it's already
starting and that's going to
continue. And
that's why I'm here today, and I
will be back
on a regular basis in Flint.
GWEN IFILL: Also today,
environmental and
civil rights groups filed a
federal lawsuit
to force replacement of all lead
pipes in
Flint. Governor Snyder said that
might be
an option down the road, but,
for now, the
state is focused on recoating
the pipes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Ferguson,
Missouri, has
reached a tentative deal with
the U.S. Justice
Department, stemming from the
police shooting
of Michael Brown. The proposed
consent decree
was announced late today. It
calls for better
training of police officers and
changes in
the rules governing use of
force. The deal
goes to the city council for its
approval
on February 9.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
campaigns
down to the wire in Iowa and New
Hampshire;
greed and sacrifice in the
battle to protect
Kenya's rhinos; women working in
what has
historically been a man's world;
and much
more.
GWEN IFILL: Now to the race for
the White
House, with only five days left
until Iowa
voters head out to caucus, with
New Hampshire's
first-in-the-nation primary not
far behind.
One candidate continues to grab
headlines
even when he exits the stage.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I probably won't bother doing
the debate.
LISA DESJARDINS: And with that,
the campaign
spotlight made it's near daily
turn to Donald
Trump.
DONALD TRUMP: Let's see how much
money FOX
is going to make on the debate
without me.
OK?
LISA DESJARDINS: The previously
center stage
debate star said last night he
will shun the
next one set for Thursday night.
His reason? FOX News wouldn't
remove moderator
Megyn Kelly. Trump has said
she's biased,
going back to the last debate on
FOX.
MEGYN KELLY, FOX News: That you
are part of
the war on women?
LISA DESJARDINS: Trump's latest
shots at FOX
News quickly ricocheted,
becoming ammunition
for his rivals, like Ted Cruz.
SEN. TED CRUZ: I would like to
invite Donald
right now to engage in a
one-on-one debate
with me any time between now and
the Iowa
caucuses.
LISA DESJARDINS: Major
candidates have missed
primary debates before,
including former Presidents
Ronald Reagan and George W.
Bush. Of course,
both of them ended up winning
the GOP nomination
anyway. So, is there really any
risk for Trump?
Maybe.
A study out of the University of
Missouri
looked at all the debates this
century, and
found that primary debates do
have a big impact,
that they are particularly
useful to undecided
voters, and that there's a lot
of candidate-switching
by voters after primary debates.
But, of course,
Trump has defied conventional
traditional
wisdom before.
DONALD TRUMP: We will make our
country great
again.
LISA DESJARDINS: And, this time,
he's drawing
from his own script. Back in
September, the
Republican front-runner defused
questions
about using a battleship as a
prop by turning
this rally into a fund-raiser
for wounded
warriors. He says whatever he
does during
tomorrow's debate will also
benefit that group.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
GWEN IFILL: And for more on
what's happening
on that debate stage tomorrow
night and how
voters are preparing for the
actual voting,
we are joined by local reporters
watching
developments up close up in New
Hampshire
and Iowa.
Paul Steinhauser is political
director of
NH1 News Network, and joins us
from Manchester,
New Hampshire. And O. Kay
Henderson is news
director at Radio Iowa. She's in
Des Moines.
Kay, I better start with you,
because we're
five days out, so you actually
get the first
word here. How are things
roiling here on
these last few days?
O. KAY HENDERSON, News Director,
Radio Iowa:
That's a great word.
Fingernails are being bitten
down to the core.
People are worried. It is a
two-person race,
it looks like, on the Republican
side between
Trump and Cruz. And on the
Democratic side,
it's a debate about whether
enthusiasm or
organization will win on caucus
night, the
organization of Hillary Clinton
hoping that
they can surmount the surging
Bernie Sanders
here.
GWEN IFILL: Does this threaten
-- and what
appears to be real -- debate
walkout that
Donald Trump is talking about
for tomorrow
night, is that having any
effect, or is that
much -- just conversation for
all of us?
O. KAY HENDERSON: Well, what it
has done is,
it has made Donald Trump
dominate the discussion
again.
That's what everybody is talking
about. What
is he going to do? He announced
late today
he is going to hold an event at
Drake University
on the same stage where Hillary
Clinton, Bernie
Sanders and Martin O'Malley
appeared earlier
there week. It will occur at
exactly the same
time that the FOX News debate
will happen.
And, of course, you heard just
moments ago
that Ted Cruz is talking about
Donald Trump
and challenging him to a debate.
So, it is
really hard for those candidates
who are hoping
that maybe they can have an
opening here on
the Republican side to break
through, when
you have two of the candidates
at the front
of the pack firing at one
another.
GWEN IFILL: Let's kick over to
New Hampshire,
Paul Steinhauser, where there is
also a debate
going on over debates.
PAUL STEINHAUSER, NH1 News
Network: There
certainly is.
We didn't have a debate next
week, the week
before the primary. We had -- on
the Democratic
side, we have had that for,
gosh, 20 or 30
years. So NBC News now proposing
a debate,
and Hillary Clinton kind of
about-face here,
right? She wasn't in favor of
more debates
for quite some time.
Now she's down double digits
here in New Hampshire,
so the idea of an extra debate,
even if it's
unsanctioned, sounds good to
her. Democratic
National Committee so far not
going to sanction
that debate. Bernie Sanders, as
of now, saying,
no, I'm not going to do it
unless it's sanctioned.
Sanders, of course, the
front-runner up here,
so maybe he doesn't want debates
anymore.
He wanted more debates just a
few weeks ago.
But, boy, the role reversal we
have seen here
in New Hampshire pretty dramatic
on the Democratic
side just in the last couple
months.
And, Kay, I got to say, hey, I'm
lonely here.
All the candidates are out your
way. This
is the first day since Christmas
week that
I haven't had a candidate here
in New Hampshire.
You took all the action.
O. KAY HENDERSON: You're
welcome.
GWEN IFILL: Paul, believe me,
they are headed
your way.
And there have been other things
happening
in New Hampshire. It's
interesting to watch
the newspaper endorsements all
of a sudden
piling up for John Kasich.
PAUL STEINHAUSER: John Kasich
hasn't been
doing it pretty quietly, right?
He hasn't
been getting a lot of attention
in the media.
But, yes, successful town halls,
a lot of
town halls, and he's getting a
lot of newspaper
endorsements lately. John Kasich
now number
two in the polls here, and with
just a week-and-a-half
to go, he is right now the guy
winning the
battle for second place. It's
pretty clear
Donald Trump is the front-runner
here by double
digits. Right now, it's a battle
for second,
third and fourth, trying to get
those tickets
out of New Hampshire -- Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: If it makes you feel
any better,
Paul, I read today that Hillary
Clinton is
planning to be in New Hampshire
next Tuesday.
The morning after the Monday
night caucuses,
believe me, you will have more
than you can
handle.
So, Kay, let's talk about
closing messages.
What are these candidates saying
as they go
around? Who are they trying line
up and what
difference is it making?
O. KAY HENDERSON: Trump's
message is consistent.
Cruz is out there trying to make
sure that
the people that he has lined up
to support
him over the past couple of
years, notably
the evangelical community, are
with him.
On the Democratic side, Bernie
Sanders is
really pressing the issue in
terms of striking
a contrast with Secretary
Clinton on some
key issues. He visited a union
hall yesterday
and talked about the TPP. He is
accusing her
of being sort of late to the
dance on a number
of key issues that are important
to progressive
Democrats.
Secretary Clinton today was in a
bowling alley
in Adel, Iowa. And her closing
message has
really pivoted. Last week, she
was really
throwing some elbows at Senator
Sanders. Today,
she was talking about how she,
Senator Sanders
and Governor O'Malley agree on a
number of
issues.
She really didn't mention their
names very
much. She was more focused on a
general election
message and a closing message,
telling people
that being in Iowa had really
changed her
and informed her on a number of
issues.
GWEN IFILL: Kay, give us the
understanding
geographically where these
candidates are
focusing. You talked about it
being a three-person
Republican race in Iowa.
Where is Ted Cruz going, where
is Donald Trump
going, where is Ben Carson
going, and after
whom?
O. KAY HENDERSON: Ben Carson has
held steady.
He has been going to evangelical
churches.
He reminds me a lot of Alan
Keyes, who did
quite well in the 2000 caucuses
here by a
core of supporters who never
really left his
side. Donald Trump is going all
over the state,
as is Secretary Clinton,
although Democrats
tend to be focusing on the
eastern half of
the state, whereas you have
Republicans who
are sort of rushing into that
northwest quadrant
of the state, hoping to nail
down the more
conservative Republicans.
The way the votes are counted
here is much
different. Democrats really have
to run a
statewide campaign, whereas
Republicans can
truly run up the score in some
of the more
conservative areas of the state
and strike
a win on caucus night.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Steinhauser,
that is an important
point how different Iowa is from
New Hampshire.
If you haven't made up your mind
in Iowa now,
you probably don't plan on
showing up to caucus.
But, in New Hampshire, it's not
the same thing.
So, what are the closing
messages there?
PAUL STEINHAUSER: Yes, you're
right.
New Hampshire voters
traditionally make up
their minds late. A lot of
voters probably
still haven't made up their
minds. New Hampshire
voters like to go out and see
the candidates
two, three, four times, ask them
the questions,
and then they will decide.
So, for the candidates right now
on the Republican
side for that big battle for
second, third
and fourth, it is a more of an
-- it's a very
different feel than in Iowa.
You're seeing
a lot more outpouring towards
independent
voters.
They are about 40 percent of the
electorate
here. They vote in either
primary. You're
seeing a lot of pitches right
now to the independent
voters by some of these
Republican candidates
and on the Democratic side as
well. The independents,
where do they go? Do they vote
on the Republican
primary or do they vote in the
Democratic
primary? That is the key
question right here
in New Hampshire right now,
Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: But, Paul, for all
that discussion
about where independents are
going to go,
undecideds are going to go,
Donald Trump has
been remarkably steady with his
third of the
Republican vote, hasn't he?
PAUL STEINHAUSER: He has. He has
been in the
upper 20s or low 30s. You pick
your poll.
We have seen that basically
since late July,
early August, hasn't changed
here in New Hampshire.
Donald Trump is coming back
Friday. The hours
after that debate, he will be
right here in
New Hampshire.
And you mentioned John Kasich
earlier. It's
interesting. John Kasich is
coming back to
New Hampshire on Saturday. He's
going to campaign
straight through here. John
Kasich will be
the only candidate in New
Hampshire on caucus
day. Everybody else will be in
Iowa. For Kasich,
it's all about the Granite
State, Gwen.
GWEN IFILL: Does Bernie Sanders
change in
New Hampshire? Does he change
his approach
at all, or is he so far ahead
now that it's
just a question of cruising to
the end?
PAUL STEINHAUSER: No, they're
not taking anything
for granted, and so he may
change his mind
on this debate.
We may have a presidential
debate here in
New Hampshire on the Democratic
side next
week. Stay tuned for that. His
lead, you pick
the poll, it could be anywhere
from about
nine to 12 points. Bernie
Sanders is not taking
a darn thing for granted here.
Hillary Clinton
doesn't want to get blown out by
double digits
here.
So, this race is going to
continue on. It's
not over on the Democratic side.
GWEN IFILL: Kay, there is so
much discussion
and anticipation for this
weekend's final
Des Moines Register poll that
everyone is
waiting to see where it leads.
Tell us a little bit about why
this is considered
to be an important poll and how
it's played
out in past years.
O. KAY HENDERSON: This is the
poll that showed
the Santorum surge in 2012. This
is the poll
that showed Barack Obama was
likely to win
in 2008.
It is considered, it's been said
often, that
this is the gold standard.
People have been
getting lots of calls from
pollsters. And
the woman who runs this poll,
Ann Selzer,
says when we call and when we
identify ourselves
as the Iowa poll, we hope that
encourages
Iowans to be a little bit more
willing to
chat with us.
And this poll, I can't stress
enough, I have
heard stories about people
actually going
to the printing plant to try to
see if they
can get the first copies off the
press to
see what it says.
GWEN IFILL: You don't think the
interwebs
have changed that a little bit
now?
(LAUGHTER)
O. KAY HENDERSON: They have a
little bit.
But, actually, the chair of the
Iowa Democratic
Party tells a compelling story
about how she
went to the printing press one
night to try
to get the first papers off the
press.
GWEN IFILL: OK. Well, we will be
watching
that both in New Hampshire and
in Iowa.
Thank you both for joining us.
Next time when
we talk, at least we will have
some, actually,
votes in the can to discuss.
Thank you both very much, Paul
Steinhauser
at NH1 in New Hampshire and O.
Kay Henderson
at Iowa Radio Network in Iowa.
Thank you.
O. KAY HENDERSON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what a board
game has to do with advancing
artificial intelligence;
The Washington Post editor on
his reporter's
545 days in an Iranian prison;
and the vision
behind a new World War I
memorial.
poaching
But, first, rhino and elephant
poaching has
reached unprecedented levels, as
the black
market price of rhino horn and
ivory tusk
has skyrocketed.
University of California
Berkeley students
Daphne Matziaraki and James
Pace-Cornsilk
traveled to Kenya and found that
the trafficking
networks are often connected to
international
terrorist groups and, on the
ground, the situation
resembles war.
NARRATOR: Ol Jogi Conservancy in
Northern
Kenya is home to 46 eastern
black rhinos.
There are 500 left in the world.
JAMIE GAYMER, Rhino Sanctuary
Manager: We
had two rhinos, I believe, to
have been shot
with a firearm, and one of those
rhinos had
its horns cut off.
NARRATOR: Jamie Gaymer manages
this rhino
sanctuary and protects the
surrounding 58,000
acres of land from a major
threat, poachers.
JAMIE GAYMER: The enemy who are
trying to
come and poach our rhinos are
becoming more
advanced, investing in
higher-tech equipment,
automatic weapons. Perhaps their
own intelligence
is quite well-established, and
we have to
evolve our security in order to
combat that.
NARRATOR: Black market buyers
from Asia and
the United States have driven
the price of
ivory to $1,000 per pound, and
rhino horn
used in traditional Chinese
medicine and seen
as a status symbol to $45,000
per pound, making
it more expensive than gold.
JAMIE GAYMER: I don't know the
definition
of war, but certainly there is a
very advanced
enemy who are putting us under
considerable
threat.
NARRATOR: And this threat may be
linked to
terrorism. The Elephant Action
League has
been investigating wildlife
trafficking for
years. In 2011 and 2012,
co-founder Andrea
Crosta spent 18 months in Kenya,
concealing
his identity and meeting with
ivory traffickers
whom he says were brokers for
the terrorist
group Al-Shabaab.
ANDREA CROSTA, Elephant Action
League: Then,
actually, the traffickers
described to us
how they organized the pickup in
this no man's
land. Al-Shabaab or Al-Shabaab
emissaries
were coming over with the
technical, you know,
the pickups with their own
scale, paying cash,
always punctual, to the point
that some of
the traffickers told us that
Al-Shabaab back
then was a preferred customer,
because no
tricks, no games, paying cash,
and then disappear.
NARRATOR: Government sources
confirm a connection
between wildlife trafficking and
terrorist
groups. A 2013 white paper from
the U.S. government's
Directorate of National
Intelligence describes
how poaching threatens security
in Africa.
"Demand for rhino horn and ivory
so outpaces
supply, and is so lucrative,
that criminal
elements of all kinds, including
some terrorist
entities and rogue military
officers, are
becoming involved in countries
across East,
Central, and Southern Africa."
The U.S. government and
organizations such
as the Clinton Global Initiative
have tried
to address the problem of
wildlife poaching
by reducing demand for ivory and
strengthening
trafficking enforcement, but
Andrea Crosta
says those efforts are not
targeting the source
of the problem.
ANDREA CROSTA: They thought that
the best
way to deal with this problem is
to put more
boots on the ground, to send a
lot of weapons,
to train rangers. You don't
address this part
of the problem with boots on the
ground. OK?
You address it with intelligence
work, with
investigations.
NARRATOR: Back in Kenya, Gaymer
protects the
wildlife at Ol Jogi with a fleet
of aircraft,
attack dogs, and more than 100
armed men.
JAMIE GAYMER: To fight poaching
is like you
are in war.
NARRATOR: As rangers head out
for their nightly
patrol, they're never sure how
dangerous their
12-hour shift will be.
JAMIE GAYMER: Unfortunately,
it's got to the
level now where human lives are
being lost.
NARRATOR: After reports of
overnight gunshots,
Gaymer is out early one morning
conducting
an aerial surveillance, counting
the rhinos
to make sure none were poached.
JAMIE GAYMER: The first layer on
the ground
are the ones who have to face
the bullets,
unfortunately.
NARRATOR: This time, all the
rhinos, and all
the rangers, were accounted for.
But the threat
comes not only from poachers,
but also from
the lure of big money. Poachers
earn a lot
more than rangers, according to
ranger John
Kabachia.
JOHN KABACHIA, Ranger: There's
that issue
that the rangers, they are being
paid in peanuts.
That's why they're being -- some
of them,
they are being turned into being
poachers.
It's easy for you, even me as a
ranger, it's
easy for me to be dragged in
that syndicate.
NARRATOR: Another ranger,
Lakini, was a poacher
until two years ago, when he
switched sides
and decided to protect wildlife,
instead of
hunting them.
LAKINI, Ranger (through
translator): I have
been killing elephants since I
was 14 years
old. I started hunting illegally
when I was
a very young boy. I learned how
to use a gun
a long time ago. If I was still
poaching,
I probably would have been
killed by rangers
by now.
JAMIE GAYMER: I don't think the
problem is
going to get any better anytime
in the near
future.
NARRATOR: For now, Jamie and his
rangers continue
their battle against an
increasingly well-armed
and well-funded enemy, with no
end in sight.
GWEN IFILL: It's not the first
time a computer
program has defeated a human in
a big match,
but researchers say today they
have made a
breakthrough in the quest to
develop artificial
intelligence.
Hari Sreenivasan has the story
from our New
York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Scientists
have developed
a program to beat the Chinese
board game Go.
The object of the game is to
surround and
control more area of the board
with markers
than your opponent.
It sounds simple enough, but Go
is considered
an extremely complicated game.
Google developed
a program known as AlphaGo to
defeat the top
human player. The results were
published in
the scientific journal "Nature."
Here's an excerpt of a video
about why the
team at Google chose Go. It was
produced by
nature and Google.
MAN: It's a very ancient game.
It's probably
the most complex game humans
play. There's
more configurations of the board
than there
are atoms in the universe.
MAN: In the game of Go, we need
this amazingly
complex, intuitive machinery,
which people
previously thought was only
possible within
the human brain, to even have an
idea of who's
ahead and what the right move is
that we should
play there.
DEMIS HASSABIS, Google DeepMind:
So, our program
combines lots of different
techniques together.
And for the first time ever,
AlphaGo, our
program, beat a professional
player on Go
on even stones, so no handicap,
on a full-size
Go board.
So, I played chess from very
young. And that
was my first game that I fell in
love with.
But then when I got to Cambridge
and doing
my undergrad club there, there
was a very
strong Go club at Cambridge with
very active
players, lots of mathematicians.
It seems
to appeal to mathematicians, the
game.
MAN: Demis was a very, very
strong game player.
He's a child prodigy and one of
the strongest
chess players in the world.
And it was very important to
some people in
the company that we could
actually beat Demis
at something. And I decided that
the game
of Go was my only chance,
because Demis didn't
really know the game at that
time.
DEMIS HASSABIS: From then on, I
fell in love
with the game. And since then, I
have always
thought it would be a great
challenge for
computers to be able to play
such an aesthetic
game, an intuitive game like Go,
a much greater
challenge than it was to play
chess.
MAN: You look at the book, there
are hundreds
of different places that this
stone can be
placed down and hundreds of
different ways
that white can respond to each
one of those
moves, hundreds of different
ways that black
can respond in turn to white's
moves.
And you get this enormous search
tree with
hundreds times hundreds times
hundreds of
possibilities. And, in fact, the
search base
of Go is too enormous and too
vast for brute
force approaches to have any
chance of succeeding.
And as a result, A.I.
researchers have to
turn to more interesting
approaches than brute
force search, which are perhaps
more human-like
in a way that they deal with the
position.
DEMIS HASSABIS: It's a very
intuitive game,
so you ask a great Go player how
it is that
they decided on a move, they
will often tell
you it felt right.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Our science
correspondent,
Miles O'Brien, joins me now from
Boston to
help us understand more.
So, Miles, we have heard of
computers beating
human at chess. we have heard of
computers
beating video games. Why is it
so significant
that a computer is getting
better and better
and beating us at this
particular game?
MILES O'BRIEN: Because it is so
hard.
This is one of those games that
if you saw
somebody playing it, you would
say, well,
that's not a lot more than
glorified checkers.
But it has literally trillions
of possibilities
when you start trying to play
out the game.
If you go back to 1997, when the
IBM Deep
Blue machine beat Gary Kasparov,
a significant
event in the world of artificial
intelligence,
that actually was brute force,
Hari.
Each and every move, the machine
would play
out every countermove subsequent
to that,
all the way until the end of the
game. It
had the ability to do that
because, in chess,
there's a limited number of
choices. In the
case of Go, even though it's
just white stones
and black stones, there are just
way too many
potential choices, hundreds upon
hundreds
each turn.
And, of course, that builds, and
eventually
that will choke the computer,
actually very
quickly. What they did was they
figured a
way to kind of break down the
problem and
make the computer smart enough
to beat a top
Go player.
HARI SREENIVASAN: OK. This is
coming from
Google. Just a couple of days
ago, we heard
an announcement from Facebook.
Google, Facebook, Alibaba, these
are all big
tech companies. Why do they have
teams of
people working on artificial
intelligence?
Why does this matter to them?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, you know
what they say.
Always follow the money, Hari.
The first and foremost thing,
the short term
here is to make sure you see the
ad which
in sometimes creepy ways is
exactly what you're
looking for when you are
browsing online.
That is built on pattern
recognition, artificial
intelligence.
That's why the Netflix
suggestions are so
apt, and that's why what you see
on Amazon
seems to fit your needs for the
moment. The
better they get at that, the
better their
business model is for the
present.
Medium term -- and this is where
we can talk
about IBM's Watson machine,
which was so successful
playing "Jeopardy" in 2011 --
you could get
to a situation where doctors
could lean on
computers with artificial
intelligence using
this pattern recognition,
machine learning
to do diagnoses.
Long term, what Google is
talking about today
is the idea that we would have
essentially
computer scientists with enough
intelligence
to be side by side with human
scientists,
pushing breakthroughs.
And then it gets into a very
interesting world.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You have said
that that's
long term and that that
long-term future is
what also scares some very smart
people about
artificial intelligence, of what
its place
is in society and whether we
will become subservient
to it.
MILES O'BRIEN: All of those
things you see
in the movies are, frankly,
possibilities,
if we don't watch it.
I was talking to one of the
leaders in the
field today, Ray Kurzweil, and
he was talking
about the possibility, he
thinks, around 2029,
when machines will pass the
so-called Turing
test, which means you will be
able to engage
in a conversation, a human
conversation with
the machine, not knowing that
it's a machine
at all.
When machines get to that point,
when they
can read and comprehend language
like we do,
then it turns into a whole new
realm of sophistication
and intelligence and ability to
think in a
machine context.
It is important -- and this has
been raised
in the likes of Bill Gates and
Elon Musk and
Stephen Hawking -- it's
important that we
make sure, as this technology
grows, and it
grows quickly, as we're seeing,
that we keep
control of it somehow, because,
ultimately,
these machines are going to be
smarter than
we are.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
conversation about artificial
intelligence especially right
now couldn't
happen without mentioning Marvin
Minsky, one
of the leaders in this field who
just passed
away.
I'm assuming that there are [by
proteges of
his at every one of these big
tech companies.
he probably knew that this
happened.
MILES O'BRIEN: Yes, he was one
of the fathers
of this world, and helped coin
the term artificial
intelligence, legendary thinker
in this regard.
And I remember interviewing him,
Hari, back
in 2010 for a piece we were
doing on robotics
and artificial intelligence. And
what really
struck me was this one
statement. He said
the things that are simple for
us are hard
for computers. And what's hard
for us is easy
for computers.
This idea, he thought, that was
so, you know,
really unpredictable in some
ways, until you
think about it, is that stuff
that a 3-year-old,
commonsense things that a
3-year-old knows
intuitively is very difficult to
teach to
a computer and vice versa.
And that -- that interesting
kind of paradox
is what drives a lot of the
thinking in artificial
intelligence to this day. He was
a great man
and a great visionary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Miles O'Brien,
thanks so much for joining us.
MILES O'BRIEN: You're welcome,
Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Ten days ago,
Washington Post
reporter Jason Rezaian was
released from an
Iranian prison after more than
500 days' detention.
He and three other Americans
were part of
a prisoner exchange between the
U.S. and Iran.
A fifth American was also
released separately.
Today, Rezaian visited the
offices of The
Washington Post, where executive
editor Marty
Baron said he was greeted with a
standing
ovation. He said Rezaian offered
thanks for
efforts on his behalf and sat in
on a meeting
of the newspaper's foreign
reporting team,
with his wife at his side.
A few days ago, I interviewed
Baron about
Rezaian's lengthy captivity and
what may lie
ahead for him.
Marty Baron, thank you very much
for joining
us.
How is Jason Rezaian doing now?
MARTY BARON, Executive Editor,
The Washington
Post: I think Jason is doing
well.
Physically, he seems in pretty
good shape.
And he's very happy to be back.
He's in a
position now where he is really
just trying
to reclaim his life, a life that
had been
sort of taken from him for 545
days. He's
spending time with his wife,
resting and doing
really whatever he'd like to do
now, because,
as a free man, he can do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How much is known
about how
he was treated while he was in
prison? And
is it fair to say he's
recovering from what
happened to him?
MARTY BARON: Well, I think it's
important
to keep in mind that he was in
solitary for
49 days. And, even after that,
he was in a
small cell with an individual
who was from
another country, a third
country. They didn't
share a language. He couldn't
communicate
with him regularly.
And so he was largely without
human contact
during those 545 days, with the
exception
of the occasions when his wife
and his mother
could visit him, perhaps once a
week or something
like that, toward the latter
period of his
time in prison. So, it was a
circumstance
that nobody would want to deal
with.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And is he
recovered from that
experience?
MARTY BARON: Well, look, it's
hard for me
to say.
I mean, that's where his -- for
medical professionals
to say, for his family to say.
I'm not in
a position to diagnose his
condition or anything
like that. He seems -- he seemed
in good spirits,
and he seems physically OK. But,
obviously,
anybody who's been through
something like
that has a lot to deal with and
a lot to process.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
certainly sounds as
if it was touch and go right
until to the
end.
We now know the Iranians held
his mother and
held his wife even after he was
already on
a plane ready to leave.
MARTY BARON: Yes, it was a hairy
situation
there.
In fact, the Iranians had
separated his mother
and his wife from him. They had
been able
to see each other at the airport
briefly.
And then they put his wife and
his mother
in a separate room, sort of
locked them up,
and kept them there for a while,
and then
after several hours indicated
that the plane
had already left and that they
should go home.
And, in fact, the plane had not
left at all.
They were supposed to be on the
plane. And
so this went on for quite some
time, a lot
of confusion. Everybody was
searching for
his wife and his mother. Their
cell phones
had been taken from them, and so
nobody knew
really what was going on.
And so the Iranians were really
playing with
them, I think, and playing with
their minds.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I interviewed
last week the
lead negotiator for the United
States on this
release, Brett McGurk, who is
the president's
envoy. And he talked about what
a tough process
it was over 14 months. They were
dealing with
people who -- some of whom had
never even
met an American before.
Do you think the U.S. government
did all it
could to get Jason Rezaian out?
MARTY BARON: Well, obviously,
they did a lot.
They negotiated with the
Iranians alongside
the nuclear talks for quite some
time, and
then kept talking with the
Iranians after
those nuclear talks concluded.
We are very
grateful for the efforts of the
U.S. government,
for all of them, actually, from
John Kerry
to Brett McGurk to all the way
on down.
And we -- it's hard for us to
assess those
efforts, really. We weren't
party to those
discussions. And so we're just
grateful that
it was a positive outcome
eventually.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you know,
Marty Baron,
about Jason Rezaian's future?
What are his
plans professionally?
MARTY BARON: I think that's
something for
him to decide right now. I'm not
sure he has
made any decisions along those
lines.
We have not wanted to bombard
him with a lot
of decisions right after
emerging from prison
after all this time. He is
really spending
time now with his wife,
relaxing. They're
just like any other couple, just
trying to
spend time with each other.
And I don't think that he's
really prepared
to make a lot of decisions at
this stage.
He will in due time, and those
decisions will
be his to make, not ours.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I gather that The
Washington
Post doesn't now have a reporter
in Iran.
Is that right? And either way,
what are the
plans for the future? Will you
be having someone
covering Iran for The Post?
MARTY BARON: Well, obviously,
Iran is a very
important story, one that we
want to cover
in every way possible.
But it's really premature to say
whether we
are going to have a
correspondent there. Obviously,
we're terribly upset and angry
over how our
correspondent was treated. This
should never
have been done. It was a grave
injustice.
He did no wrong. And the Iranian
government
produced no evidence of any
wrongdoing.
So, we would need some
assurances from the
Iranian government that this
wouldn't happen
again. But we're really not in a
position
to decide unilaterally, first of
all, because
the Iranian government has to
allow us in,
in the first place. And we will
just have
to wait and see. I think that
that is a decision
that will be made in due course.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Martin Baron, the
executive
editor of The Washington Post,
we thank you.
MARTY BARON: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, tomorrow
night, we will
talk with Matthew Trevithick.
He's the fifth
American recently released by
Iran.
GWEN IFILL: It wasn't, in the
end, the war
to end all wars, but World War I
did have
a profound impact on so much
that came after.
Now there's a plan for a
memorial to honor
the service of Americans who
fought in that
war.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pershing Park in
downtown Washington,
D.C., was buried in snow this
week. The two-acre
park is a block from the
Treasury Department
and White House and just down
Pennsylvania
Avenue from the Capitol.
The statue of the man it's named
for, General
John Pershing, commander of U.S.
forces in
World War I, stood tall above
the white carpet.
If all goes as hoped for by a
group called
the U.S. World War I Centennial
Commission,
this will be the site of the
first national
memorial to commemorate this
country's involvement
in the war.
Edwin Fountain is the group's
vice chairman.
EDWIN FOUNTAIN, U.S. World War I
Centennial
Commission: World War I is very
much lost
in our national consciousness.
It was subsumed
by the depression and by World
War II. It
didn't have the wealth of
newsreel and nightly
news coverage and Hollywood
production and
other media and popular culture
that later
wars did.
We're now two or three
generations beyond
the people who fought it. It's
quickly receding
in our national memory. And it
shouldn't.
JEFFREY BROWN: World War I, the
so-called
Great War, began in July 1914
and ended with
the armistice on November 11,
1918.
Overall, some 38 million
soldiers and civilians
were killed or wounded in one of
history's
bloodiest conflicts, mostly
waged in Europe.
The U.S. joined the fighting in
1917, deploying
two million soldiers overseas;
116,516 were
killed, more than in Korea and
Vietnam combined.
Sandra Pershing's husband was
the general's
grandson.
SANDRA PERSHING, U.S. World War
I Centennial
Commission: The general loved
his troops,
and he really would have wanted
to be surrounded
by images of everybody that
helped during
the war.
And I think it can be a very
nice tribute
to everyone who fought and
served, and to
a lot of people now who can be
here and enjoy
it, and look around and say,
thank you. We're
free.
JEFFREY BROWN: The commission,
authorized
by Congress in 2013, received
360 design submissions
from around the world, and an
independent
jury winnowed those to five,
titled World
War I Grotto of Remembrance,
Heroes Green,
an American Family Portrait Wall
in the Park,
Plaza to a Forgotten War, and
the winning
design concept, announced
yesterday, called
the Weight of Sacrifice.
It was created by 25-year-old
Joe Weishaar,
just two years out of an
architecture program
at the University of Arkansas
and yet to have
his official license. He will
work on the
memorial with sculptor Sabin
Howard and a
Baltimore architecture firm.
JOE WEISHAAR, Architect: There's
no way that
I would have imagined that, at
25, I would
be doing something like this.
JEFFREY BROWN: Weishaar lives in
Chicago,
where I reached him earlier
today.
JOE WEISHAAR: What drew me into
the competition
was kind of the realization, as
soon as I
saw the competition, that there
wasn't a World
War I memorial in D.C., and I
wanted to participate
in that process. I wanted to
help create something
for the people of the war.
JEFFREY BROWN: Weishaar's design
includes
two distinct spaces, including
figurative
sculptures and a small park, all
ringed by
maple trees.
JOE WEISHAAR: The upper plaza
space is really
supported by the walls.
The idea, at least in some great
metaphor,
is that public space in this
country is a
granted right because of
freedom. And the
people of the war fought for
that freedom
in -- both domestically and
abroad. And so,
again, the great narrative, the
upper plaza
is really being supported by the
protection
of freedom, and then the lower
plaza is really
a reflection of the past and a
record of the
past.
JEFFREY BROWN: If the Pershing
statue represents
the great man older style of
memorials, the
commission was clearly looking
to the more
contemporary abstract style that
began with
Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans
Memorial.
Since then, monuments to the
Korean and Second
World War have also been built
on the National
Mall.
PHILIP KENNICOTT, The Washington
Post: The
best thing about this design is
the simplicity
of it and the fact the designer
has been sensitive
to the existing parks' sense of
an oasis in
the city.
JEFFREY BROWN: But Philip
Kennicott, Pulitzer
Prize-winning architecture
critic for The
Washington Post, raised a larger
question
as to whether a national
memorial is needed.
PHILIP KENNICOTT: We have to
remember that
the first World War is already
very, very
well-memorialized, many, many
cities, towns,
squares, villages, they have a
World War I
memorial.
So, if we think about memory,
the problem
here is not the lack of places
to go and think
about the war. It's a lack of
willingness
and understanding of the war in
the first
place. So, we could actually
create a new
way of memorializing that
returned us to these
existing memorials and
reconnected us with
the history and the honor that
is built into
them already.
JEFFREY BROWN: Edwin Fountain
says honoring
the war requires a national
spotlight.
EDWIN FOUNTAIN: I think most
Americans don't
realize that scale of that
sacrifice and what
it represents in terms of what
our soldiers
and sailors and Marines
accomplished over
there. That, to the commission,
needs to be
commemorated with the same
weight as we have
remembered the other wars of the
20th century
on the National Mall.
JEFFREY BROWN: In any case, this
week's announcement
is not the end of the process.
Money must
be raised, an estimated $30
million to $35
million, all to come from
private donors.
And the design, construction,
and everything
else about the project must go
through myriad
reviews. Still, the commission
hopes to break
ground in 2017, and dedicate the
memorial
a year later, on Veterans Day,
the 100-year
anniversary of the armistice.
And, yes, they say, the statue
of General
Pershing will remain in whatever
shape the
memorial finally takes.
I'm Jeffrey Brown for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, we
bring you
a profile of Kalei Kipp, a young
female welder
from Lebanon, Pennsylvania,
taking on a historically
male-dominated industry.
This is the third installation
of our Student
Reporting Labs series called
Outside the Box.
It is produced by the aspiring
journalists
at Cedar Crest High School.
NARRATOR: According to NBC News,
only 3 percent
of the professional welders in
the United
States are women.
KALEI KIPP, Cedar Crest High
School Student:
I think welding has, like,
shaped me as a
person, because it helped me to
be myself,
and it helps me express my
creativity.
NARRATOR: Kalei Kipp is a
student at Cedar
Crest High School and is
considering pursuing
a career in welding.
KALEI KIPP: It's different from
every other
class that is offered at this
school, and
it's kind of like dangerous and
neat.
NARRATOR: She recently met a
professional
welder named Caitlin Rude, and
they discussed
what it's like to be a female
welder.
CAITLIN RUDE, Professional
Welder: I don't
think that there's a big
difference between
men's and women's work. I think
that there's
a big difference between those
who are dedicated
and passionate about welding and
those who
aren't.
KALEI KIPP: I have been
considering maybe
pursuing welding as a career. I
have been
looking into it a lot. And I
think it's really
neat. And, like, you get paid a
lot. And it
would just be something really
different to
do.
CAITLIN RUDE: I think the bigger
picture is,
why aren't there more women
going into welding,
or why aren't there more women
going into
manufacturing? And I think that,
from day
one, women are fed the story of
pink and princess
and highly emotionally,
sensitive creatures.
But it's this drug that, you
know, we're passing
around, and boys are supposed to
be masculine
and hard and strong. And it's
definitely a
false representation of
individuality.
KALEI KIPP: Not a lot of people
get to experience
welding. And I think that it's a
really good
experience and thing to have and
know how
to do.
CAITLIN RUDE: We are all
different. We're
all interested in different
things. And it
doesn't matter, our gender or
our sex, what
we want to do with our lives.
GWEN IFILL: Pink and princess.
To see more teen-produced
stories about how
Generation Z refuses to let
gender stereotypes
influence their choices, visit
the Outside
the Box page on
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also online right now: People
have known for
thousands of years that the
Earth is round.
But that didn't stop recording
artist B.o.B
from starting a battle with
astrophysicist
Neil deGrasse Tyson about it. On
our Science
page, we offer seven experiments
that you
can use -- you can do just in
case you still
want proof.
And tomorrow marks the 30th
anniversary of
the Challenger space shuttle
disaster, which
took the lives of seven crew
members, including
teacher Christa McAuliffe.
Today, a fifth-grade
science teacher shares his
memories of that
event and how he uses space
exploration to
teach his students about math,
science and
the power of imagination. You
can find his
essay on our home page.
All that and more is on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Again, the major
developments
of the day.
Ammon Bundy, the leader of an
armed militia
occupying a wildlife refuge in
Eastern Oregon,
was ordered held without bail,
along with
six other militia members
arrested late yesterday.
They will each face federal
felony charges
of conspiring to impede
officers. Members
of the Federal Reserve Board
announced a key
short-term interest rate would
remain unchanged.
And Ferguson, Missouri, reached
a tentative
deal with the U.S. Justice
Department following
the police shooting of Michael
Brown. The
proposed agreement calls for
better training
of police officers, new rules
governing the
use of force and other issues.
Tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": Bloomberg
View's Al Hunt on the campaign
trail in Iowa.
I hear he's a good reporter.
GWEN IFILL: I hear that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday: how ethanol is
fueling the political
debate in Iowa.
I'm Judy Woodruff
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again right
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
and Al Hunt, too, thank you, and
good night.